fix: Refactor C# mutation orchestration to a simpler design (#2831)
stryker-mutator/stryker-net: docs/technical-reference/Mutation Orchestration Design.md

2. This allows method signature to better match the use case(s).
### Injection methods
The orchestration logic use a shared `MutantPlacer` during the mutation process of one project. This instance stores the unique namespace name that is used by the mutation switching logic for this project. So injection methods related to mutation switching are instance methods, the others are often static.
MutantPlacer aggregates a few injection engines that are useful across the mutation logic. Those can be used via `MutantPlacer`’s methods.
#### Compilation helpers
Those engines inject code that are used to reduce the number of compilation errors. Indeed, some mutants alter the control flow which can lead to using non initialized variables, or failing to return a value. So Stryker injects statements to limit the risk of such an event.
- `AddEndingReturn(...)`: returns a copy of the provided `BlockSyntax` with a `return default(type)` statement added at the end. This method does not add a `return` if:
	- this is an iteration method (`yield` statement)
	- return type is `void` or a `Task` (for async method).
	- the last statement is a `return` or a `throw`

> 	- the block does not contain any `return`

Reviewer: ```suggestion
	- the block does not contain any `return`
	
```
Add new line at the end of a list to format markdown correctly

	This method ensures mutations do not break the whole method and trigger roll back logic.
- `PlaceStaticContextMarker(...)`:  injects the logic used by Stryker to track _static context_ (i.e. code that is run during some static initialization). It relies on a `using` expression. This method supports blocks and expressions.
	This method must be used to mark any static construct, disregarding mutation.

> - `InjectOutParametersInitialization(...)`: adds statements to initialize to default value any out parameters.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- `InjectOutParametersInitialization(...)`: adds statements to initialize any out parameters to their default value.
```

#### Switching logic injectors

> Those engines inject mutations and the switching logic (`if` or `?: `) to control them.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Those engines inject mutations and the switching logic (`if` or `?:`) to control them.
```

> -  `PlaceStatementControlledMutations(…)`: build an `if` statement with the provided mutation as the `true` condition and the provided statement/block has the `false` condition. The `if` statement will be chained if there are more than one mutation.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
-  `PlaceStatementControlledMutations(...)`: build an `if` statement with the provided mutation as the `true` condition and the provided statement/block as the `false` condition. The `if` statement will be chained if there is more than one mutation.
```

> - `PlaceExpressionControlledMutations`:  build a ternary operator (`?:`) expression with the provided mutation as the `true` condition and the provided expression has the `false` condition . The conditional expression will be chained if there are more than one mutation.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- `PlaceExpressionControlledMutations`:  build a ternary operator (`?:`) expression with the provided mutation as the `true` condition and the provided expression as the `false` condition. The conditional expression will be chained if there is more than one mutation.
```

#### Rollback helpers
Those engines are used during to remove mutations (and helpers) that cause compilation errors.
- `RemoveMutant(...)`: returns a syntax node with the mutation removed.
- `RequiresRemovingChildMutations(...)`: returns true if the syntax node contains an injection that can not be removed without removing any child mutation/injection first.
- `FindAnnotations(...)`: returns information regarding injection in the provided syntax node, such as used engine and mutant id (if relevant)
## Node orchestrators
You can browse this list for figuring out how each syntax structure is mutated, which is useful when trying to understand why Stryker does not give the result you expected or fails.  Remember that Stryker tries out orchestrators in declaration order until one `CanHandle` returns true; so make sure that the most specific orchestrators are declared first.

> Also, you may want to check `DoNotMutateOrchestrator`  when trying to understand why some syntax constructs are not mutated: this may be deliberately.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Also, you may want to check `DoNotMutateOrchestrator`  when trying to understand why some syntax constructs are not mutated: this may be deliberate.
```

You can start by looking at `CSharpMutantOrchestrator.BuildOrchestratorList()` to see which orchestrators are used and their relative declaration order.

### Base classes
These classes are responsible for the general structure of the orchestration phases and/or are used as parent classes to other, more specific, orchestrators.
#### CsharpMutantOrchestrator

> Not an orchestrator per se. This is the starting point for mutating C# source file. It aggregates the configured mutators and stores mutations are they are generated. It inherits from `BaseMutantOrchestrator<T,TU>`which implements the base logic needed by the overall workflow.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Not an orchestrator per se. This is the starting point for mutating C# source files. It aggregates the configured mutators and stores mutations are they are generated. It inherits from `BaseMutantOrchestrator<T,TU>` which implements the base logic needed by the overall workflow.
```

Note that there is an `FsharpMutantOrchestrator` class for a future support of F#.

> - `MutantPlacer Placer` : this property stores the `MutantPlacer` instance that should be use for code injection

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- `MutantPlacer Placer`: this property stores the `MutantPlacer` instance that should be used for code injection
```

- `SyntaxNode Mutate(...)`: mutates an entire syntax tree
- `GetHandler(...)`: returns the appropriate orchestrator for a given syntax node
- `GenerateMutationsForNode(...)`: returns all mutants (as mutant instances) for a given node, according to configuration and context/Stryker comments).
#### NodeSpecificOrchestrator
`NodeSpecificOrchestrator<TNode, TBase>` is the base class of all orchestrators. It implements the workflow described earlier and defines several virtual methods that inheriting orchestrators can override to customize the workflow. It has been described earlier in this document.
#### ExpressionSpecificOrchestrator

> `ExpressionSpecificOrchestrator<t>`handles syntax nodes that are part of an expression. Note that some syntax constructs inheriting from `ExpressionSyntax` are not considered as expressions from Stryker point of view. 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
`ExpressionSpecificOrchestrator<T>` handles syntax nodes that are part of an expression. Note that some syntax constructs inheriting from `ExpressionSyntax` are not considered as expressions from Stryker point of view. 
```

This class provides the following implementations
- `PrepareContext(...)`: declares a `MutationControl.Expression` context and override `RestoreContext()`
- `StoreMutations(...)`: stores mutation in the current context or next higher block context if the mutation contains a variable declaration.
- `InjectMutations(...)`: inject mutations controlled by conditional operator.
#### StatementSpecificOrchestrator
`StatementSpecificOrchestrator` handles `StatementSyntaxNodes` (and inheriting nodes).
This class provides the following implementations
- `PrepareContext(...)`: declares a `{MutationControl.Expression}` context .

> - `RestoreContext()` : leaves the current context.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- `RestoreContext()`: leaves the current context.
```

- `InjectMutations(...)`:  injects mutations controlled by if statements.
#### MutateAtStatementLevelOrchestrator
`MutateAtStatementLevelOrchestrator` class deals with (expression level) syntax constructs which mutations should be controlled at statement level, because they must be controlled via an `if` statement.
The constructor accepts a _predicate_ which is used for finer identification of SyntaxNodes.
This class implements:
- `CanHandle(...)`: forwards the request to the predicate (if any)

> - `StoreMutations(...)`: stores mutation at the next higher statement level.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- `StoreMutations(...)`: stores mutation at the next higher statement level.

```
Add new line at the end of a list to format markdown correctly

This class is used for:

> - `Post/PrefixUnaryExpressionSyntax` (\++/\—): when part of a for statement or an expression statement

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- `Post/PrefixUnaryExpressionSyntax` (++/--): when part of a for statement or an expression statement
```

- `InitializerExpressionSyntax`: for non empty array declarations.

> - `AssignmentExpressionSyntax`( x=value) as they  cannot be part of a ternary operation.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- `AssignmentExpressionSyntax` (x=value) as they  cannot be part of a ternary operation.
```

#### MemberDefinitionOrchestrator

> `MemberDefinitionOrchestrator<T>` is a generic (base) class to help implement orchestrator for SyntaxNode that define class members. It implements:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
`MemberDefinitionOrchestrator<T>` is a generic (base) class to help implement orchestrator for `SyntaxNode` that define class members. It implements:
```

- `PrepareContext(...)`: creates a `MutantControl.Member` context.
- `RestoreContext()`: leaves the current context

#### BaseFunctionOrchestrator
`BaseFunctionOrchestrator<T>` is an abstract base class helping orchestrate methods, functions (locals and anonymous) as well as accessors. This class will convert  from expression body to block body form if any mutation requires it. This class also implements `IInstrumentCode` and provides the adequate roll back logic for the compilation phase. It inherits from `MemberDefinitionOrchestrator<T>`.
Child classes must implement abstract methods that abstract some common operations:
- `ParameterList(T)`: must return the `ParameterListSyntax` instance listing all the provided method’s parameters. Returns an empty list if there are none.

> - `ReturnType(T)`:  must return the `TypeSyntax` for the method’s returning type.  Should return `null` If the type cannot be determined (anonymous lambdas). One can use `RoslynHelper.VoidTypeSyntax()` if the method is void , explicitly or implicitly (constructors for example).

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- `ReturnType(T)`:  must return the `TypeSyntax` for the method’s returning type.  Should return `null` if the type cannot be determined (anonymous lambdas). One can use `RoslynHelper.VoidTypeSyntax()` if the method is void, explicitly or implicitly (constructors for example).
```

- `GetBodies(T)`: must return the body for the method. Return value is a tuple with the block body as first item and the expression body as the second. At least one of them should be null

> - `SwitchToThisBodies(...)`: Must replace the method body with the provided body (either block or expression). This method is used to perform the expression to block body conversion and for roll back as well. Note that implementations assumes one of the provided bodies is null (as a function cannot have both an expression body and block statement body;

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- `SwitchToThisBodies(...)`: Must replace the method body with the provided body (either block or expression). This method is used to perform the expression to block body conversion and for roll back as well. Note that implementations assume one of the provided bodies is null (as a function cannot have both an expression body and block statement body;

```

Orchestrator’s overrides:

> - `InjectMutations(...)`: if the body is in expression form and there are mutations that have not been injected (because they require statement or block level control), converts the body to block form and inject those mutations. If the body is in block form, injects out parameters initialization to default and add an ending `return`  statement if it looks helpful.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- `InjectMutations(...)`: if the body is in expression form and there are mutations that have not been injected (because they require statement or block level control), converts the body to block form and injects those mutations. If the body is in block form, injects out parameters initialization to default and adds an ending `return`  statement if it looks helpful.

```

Finally, this class implements an injection engine:
- `ConvertToBlockBody(...)` converts the method from expression form to block body form. Does nothing if the method has no expression body.
-  `RemoveInstrumentation(...)`: reverts the conversion. Note that this method requires that the body contains only a `return` or expression statement.
### Specialized orchestrators
These orchestrators are specific for certain syntax node types.
#### MemberAccessOrchestrator

> `MemberAccessOrchestrator<T>`is used for ‘MemberAccess’ kind of expression, which is defined as a lower level than expression. This is because while those syntax constructs inherit from `ExpressionSyntax`, they cannot be replaced by other kind of expressions, which means that Stryker cannot use a conditional operator (`?:`) to mutate them in place; it must happen at a higher hierarchical level in the expression.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
`MemberAccessOrchestrator<T>` is used for ‘MemberAccess’ kind of expression, which is defined as a lower level than expression. This is because while those syntax constructs inherit from `ExpressionSyntax`, they cannot be replaced by other kinds of expression, which means that Stryker cannot use a conditional operator (`?:`) to mutate them in place; it must happen at a higher hierarchical level in the expression.
```

It is declared for `MemberAccessExpressionSyntax`, `MemberBindingExpressionSyntax` and `SimpleNameSyntax`.

This class implements:
- `CanHandle(...)`: returns true if the parent expression is either an invocation or member access expression.
- `PrepareContext(...)`: signals that this is a `MutantControl.MemberAccess` syntax level.
- `RestoreContext()`: leaves the current context.

#### DoNotMutateOrchestrator
`DoNotMutateOrchestrator<T>` is a generic class that be can used to ensure some type of `SyntaxNode` will not be mutated (including the node’s children). Its constructor accepts an optional predicate to confirm if a node should be mutated or not.
This class is used for several constructs:
- `AttributeListSyntax`: Attributes must be defined at compile time.
- `ParameterListSyntax`: Parameters and default values must be known at compile time.
- `EnumMemberSyntax`: Enumeration value must be known at compile time

> -  `RecursivePatternSyntax` : Pattern syntax must be known at compile time.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
-  `RecursivePatternSyntax` : Pattern syntax must be known at compile time.
```
```suggestion
-  `RecursivePatternSyntax`: Pattern syntax must be known at compile time.
```

-  `UsingDirectiveSyntax`: using directives are fixed and critical for compilation
- `FieldDeclarationSyntax`  (only const fields): cannot modify const fields at run time.

> - ‘`LocalDeclarationStatementSyntax` (only const): cannot modify constants at run time.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- `LocalDeclarationStatementSyntax` (only const): cannot modify constants at run time.

```

This class implements:
- `CanHandle(...)`: forwards the call to the predicate (if one was provided at construction), returns true otherwise.

> - `Mutate(...` : returns the unmodified syntax node.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- `Mutate(...)`: returns the unmodified syntax node.
```

#### InvocationExpressionOrchestrator
`InvocationExpressionOrchestrator` is used for methods and functions invocations (`xxxx(...)`).
This class implements:
- `PrepareContext(...)`: unless the invoked name is in the `MemberBindingExpression` form, I.e. starts with a dot `.` as those cannot be used in a condition expression. Then it declares a member access context.
- `RestoreContext()`: leaves the current context.
- `StoreMutations(...)`: Injects mutations at the current level, except if there are declarations in the arguments list. Then inject mutations at the next higher block level.
- `InjectMutation(...)`: it injects mutations normally in the current expression.

#### StaticFieldDeclarationOrchestrator
`StaicFieldDeclarationOrchestrator` is used for static fields in order to inject static marking logic used for coverage capture. It inherits from `MemberDefinitionOrchestrator`.
This class implements:
- `CanHandle(...)`: returns true for static fields with at least one initializer.
- `PrepareContext(...)`:  creates a static context.
- `InjectMutations(...)`: Actually injects mutations (call base implementation) then injects a static marker.

#### StaticConstructorOrchestrator

> `StaticConstructorOrchestrator ` is used for class constructors in  order to inject static marking logic used for coverage capture. It inherits from `BasMethodOrchestrator`.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
`StaticConstructorOrchestrator` is used for class constructors in order to inject static marking logic used for coverage capture. It inherits from `BasMethodOrchestrator`.
```

This class implements:
- `CanHandle(...)`: returns true for class constructors.
- `PrepareContext(...)`:  creates a static context.
- `InjectMutations(...)`: Actually injects mutations (call base implementation) then injects a static marker.

#### ExpressionBodiedPropertyOrchestrator
`ExpressionBodiedPropertyOrchestrator`  deals with properties expressed as simple expressions, such as 
`int MyProperty => 4;` 
or with static properties with an initializer, such as
`static int MyProperty  {get {...} set {...}} = MyInitialization(4);`
It inherits from `BaseFunctionOrchestrator` and implements required abstract methods.
This class implements:
- `OrchestrateChildrenMutation(...)`: ensure the node `Initializer` is mutated with a static context (if needed).
#### LocalFunctionOrchestrator
This class handles `LocalFunctionStatementSyntax`. It inherits from `BaseFunctionOrchestration` and implements all required abstract methods.
#### AnonymousFunctionExpressionOrchestrator

> This class handles `AnonymousFunctionExpressionSyntax `. It inherits from `BaseFunctionOrchestration` and implements all required abstract methods.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
This class handles `AnonymousFunctionExpressionSyntax`. It inherits from `BaseFunctionOrchestration` and implements all required abstract methods.
```

#### BaseMethodDeclarationOrchestrator

> This class handles `BaseMethodDeclarationSyntax `. It inherits from `BaseFunctionOrchestration` and implements all required abstract methods.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
This class handles `BaseMethodDeclarationSyntax`. It inherits from `BaseFunctionOrchestration` and implements all required abstract methods.
```

#### AccessorSyntaxOrchestrator

> This class handles `AccessorDeclarationSyntax `. It inherits from `BaseFunctionOrchestration` and implements all required abstract methods.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
This class handles `AccessorDeclarationSyntax`. It inherits from `BaseFunctionOrchestration` and implements all required abstract methods.
```

#### LocalDeclarationOrchestrator
This class handles `LocalDeclarationStatement` (i.e. local variables declaration). It implements:
- `InjectMutations(...)`: it does not inject mutations, as they should be controlled at the scope level: using an `if` statement here would change the scope of the variable. As a consequence, mutations are controlled at the block level.

#### BlockOrchestrator
This class handles `BlockStatementSyntax` nodes. It implements:
- `PrepareContext(...)`: declares a **new** block context. Having a new block is used for scoped mutant filtering via Stryker comments
- `RestoreContext()`: restore the context
- `InjectMutations(...)`: injects mutations at the block level. That is the block is mutated and mutation switching is done via one or more `if` statements.
#### SyntaxNodeOrchestrator
This class handles any `SyntaxNode`. As such it provides the default behavior, that is no mutation. It implements:

> - `GenerateMutationForNode(...)` : it does not try to generate mutations for this node and returns an empty list.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- `GenerateMutationForNode(...)`: it does not try to generate mutations for this node and returns an empty list.
```

## Conclusion

> Congratulations for reading this 5K words document to its end. I hope you found useful, and most importantly, use it when working on this parts of the project.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Congratulations for reading this 5K words document to its end. I hope you found it useful, and most importantly, use it when working on this part of the project.
```

# Stryker’s crash course on C# syntax parsing and mutation

## Audience

> This document’s purpose is to help developers who need or want to understand how Stryker.Net parses and mutates C# source code. The current design (as in V3.x) is the result of several years of experience and refinement and may be intimidating at first.

Author: 😄

> This document’s purpose is to help developers who need or want to understand how Stryker.Net parses and mutates C# source code. The current design (as in V3.x) is the result of several years of experience and refinement and may be intimidating at first.

Author: This is a valid remark. I decided to change this to V4, after contemplating rewording this to having the new design part of V4 (V3 being then 'previous design'). But it had no added value
